the people that you and I spend a
certain amount of Our Lives railing
against is in part because they are
censorious bullies they want to tell you
and me and and everyone else what we
should find funny what we should read
what we should say what we should think
how we should act and
in my mind it's an invitation which I
decline these people who are so primed
so unfunny so tediously repressive in
everything they do don't stand a chance
in the long run
[Music]
hello everyone watching and listening
today I'm speaking with author columnist
and political commentator Douglas Murray
who's been on my podcast a number of
times we talked about his latest book
not so long ago the war on the west
we discuss how a misguided purpose leads
to abject misery and hopelessness the
cowardice of experts who choose silence
experts and others let's say you choose
silence in the face of malevolence the
psychology of fear and the necessity of
willful exposure to combat that fear
so we went out for dinner last night to
Royal 35 which was very good that's a
steakhouse that looks like a classic
mafioso place as far as I'm concerned
but they make great steaks and um one of
the things we talked a little bit about
was your burgeoning interest and purpose
and so I'm curious about that so the
first question I have I guess is why why
you think that's attracted your interest
that particular topic
I think it's because I just increasingly
noticed as I'm sure you do that it's the
question underneath or miss all
questions in our day
um a lot of the things that that you and
I spend a considerable amount of our
time railing against
our um things we critique or criticize
find holes in push back against
but you're always confronted by the fact
that you're dealing with somebody who
believes that they find their sense of
purpose from the thing that we find you
know untruthful
irritating or worse
and you see all of these versions in our
day I think of misguided purpose purpose
right used for the wrong ends uh mean
meaning found in places that really
don't give much satisfaction
um but but
give people the drive to get up in the
morning and act sometimes well often
malevolently
um more often than not perhaps them
relevantly but that it seems to me that
this sort of meaning crisis is one that
many of the people that you and I have
problems with should we say are actually
addressing I mean in their in their own
inept and sometimes malevolent way they
are so sort of speaking to adapt well
one of the things the left goes very
well there's a developmental
psychologist
named Jean Piaget who is a great
psychologist and uh he he called himself
a genetic epistemologist actually
because he
was interested in knowledge structures
and how they developed and so he really
thought he was a practical philosopher
but in any case
um he noted that
human children as they develop go
through stages of development each stage
was in some ways a different you could
say a different theory of being and that
the last stage that he identified was
the Messianic stage and developmental
psychologists haven't paid much
attention to that because they tended to
shy away from anything that smacked of
let's say religious thinking even though
Piaget was motivated
fundamentally by the desire to bridge
the gap between science and religion
which by the way I think he did quite
well the Messianic period is late
adolescence and you might think about it
anthropologically I suppose as
associated with the need for
individuals of that age to move away
from their immediate local friendship
Group which would have been the bridge
from dependence on their parents to
identification with the broader culture
and so what they're trying to find at
that point is uh something like a sense
of universal purpose right and yeah and
and that that touches on this issue of
of purpose obviously and meaning and you
you
in the way that you laid this out when
we began this discussion
you you implied a number of
presuppositions of that there are
malevolent purposes that there are
fractured purposes that there are
counterproductive purposes that there is
purpose I presume you would also agree
that there are shallow purposes and
purposes absolutely yeah I mean like
there are there are shallow enjoyments
and deep enjoyments one of the things
that Burke says in his work on the
sublime is that of course there are
there are the things you immediately
know to be enjoyable and there are
acquired pleasures and that's just on
the level of pleasures and he gives the
example I think of cigar smoking or
whiskey I think as an example of a
pleasure you don't get straight away
um and uh so yes I mean there are things
that can drive people and give also an
ephemeral sense of purpose but the issue
of deeper purpose is is one I just see
as being very Dangerously unaddressed in
our day and I think I I think it's it's
uh I referred to this recently in a
speech in London
um saying if for instance the the left
approach you with uh the opportunity to
spend your life rampagingly campaigning
to provide you know I know Cosmic social
justice on this earth now the planet
saving the planet
um
not burning to death tomorrow or various
other things and also are driven by
things like Envy resentment very very
deep deep
human instincts in a radical human
instincts but if you don't like what
they're doing and what they're
suggesting you can't just answer on a
technicality
um and the example I give quite or I
gave him that speech in London was you
know if if if if you have people telling
you can get a burning sense of of of
meaning in your life by being resentful
uh conservative or somebody on the right
cannot simply say well we've got a tax
break we've discovered right right I
mean don't simply say
that resentment is wrong because the
alternative isn't well fleshed out
well the alternative as Nietzsche says
is gratitude well right right right
which is
uh which is doable but you need to work
at that more than you need to work a
resentment yeah well that okay so
there's a bridge there between the idea
of longer term and acquired purposes and
practice and work you said that you have
to work at gratitude right and so that
makes it a practice and I don't think
that I think that people generally
presume that uh a sentiment or state of
mind like gratitude is something that
descends upon you rather than something
that you acquire through effort and I
think that that's a real mistake right
absolutely I mean that you and I I think
both probably have the same attitude on
this which is that we know that you know
we're very lucky today to be sitting in
a city which has its problems but is
very successful
um you've got some chance of being
mugged in the street but not all that
much if you do you can get Justice there
is a justice system uh there are people
who hear you if you have suffered an
injustice we know that all of these
things are actually worldwide at the
moment and also historically very very
unusual so you and I might have quite a
developed sense of gratitude because we
might remind ourselves of these things
on a daily basis I might remind myself I
walk past some Patrick's Cathedral this
morning I think uh what a building now
you can take that for granted or you
cannot and you can think even for a
second about the amount of Labor and
devotion that went into that but but
that is something that some people need
to be reminded of my suspicion is that
the societies will live in now in the
developed West you do have to work at it
and the reason why is there's this
massive context collapse whereby we
assume that the state that we are in is
the natural state of mankind and
somebody I know who well and there's
also conservatives on the Progressive
types tend to differ on what constitutes
the natural state of mankind because the
conservatives and I would say the wiser
people tend to be more
um influenced you might say by Thomas
Hobbs than by Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
we assume that let's say that
um this the state of brutish natural
life is or the state of natural life is
brutish and short and miserable rather
than some pre-industrial paradisal state
where everyone lived in harmony with
nature well I I gave the example in my
last book in the war in the west of his
rather delicious but uh Savage lesson
that a group of French Sailors learned
uh after Rousseau they're big russoians
they land on an island in New Zealand
and um assume that the natives live in a
state of nature uh and uh I think
they're all killed in Eaton
um the ones who survive the Expedition
and end up with a very low opinion of
Rousseau right
um they loved it the hard way
um that's the same Rousseau that led all
his children rot in orphanages right yes
yeah
um but but but anyhow I I think that
this this issue of are you talking at
comparable deaths
remains important gratitude is obviously
a part of this gratitude becomes easier
to to feel if you know what the
alternatives are one of the things they
always say about resentment is that's a
good opposite I think yeah and um I know
I know a school teacher who says that
the single biggest thing that will
change the behavior of a child is if
they are of anonymity an immigrant
background and go back into school
holiday to their country of origin right
you know you if you meet your second
third cousins in Pakistan or Algeria or
Sudan
you have a different view of Canada
Britain or America yeah well that that
also touches on
part of the reason that you laid out for
ingratitude
the way you conceptualized it to begin
with say talking about walking down the
streets of New York being unable to
compare that with anything outside of
New York to this present so ignorance is
actually one ignorant problem is that if
you don't know anything about history
and there there's a there's also I
suppose as well as willful as well as
ignorance there's willful blindness and
and the unwillingness to put in the
effort that it would require to be great
absolutely so you know I've been
considering the Book of Job in some
depth recently and it's a very
interesting book and and it it pertains
to purpose I would say so by the time
the Book of Job is written and
eventually introduced into the biblical
Corpus there's a real transformation
in the conceptualization of God and one
there's a key figure in that
transformation which is extraordinarily
interesting the figure is Elijah so when
Christ is transfigured on the mount
two prophets appear with him one is
Moses and that's obvious why that is but
the other is Elijah and Elijah compared
to Moses is a relatively minor figure
and so there's some chapter or some
verses devoted to his story but not a
lot but what what here's the key
psychological significance let's say of
Elijah so Elijah set himself up against
Jezebel who is a queen at that time a
foreign queen of Israel who had
introduced the worship of fall into the
Israelite into the Israeli culture and
ball was a nature clock and so Elijah
has a famous dispute with the prophets
of Paul and ends up with yahweh's help
defeating them and so he establishes
Supremacy over ball this is the golden
cough
he builds an altar he builds an altar
and uh challenges the prophets of ball
to have the sacrifice destroyed by their
God and that doesn't happen and then he
calls on Yahweh who sends down fire to
destroy the not only the sacrifice but
the altar itself and then he has the
prophets of Baal put to death which
doesn't exactly thrill Jezebel and then
he runs away because she's after him and
this is where the radical
transformational curse so he's hiding
out in a cave and uh
he he feels he's the only one left who's
still an acolyte of Yahweh and the
entire you know in the entire Israeli uh
Israelite uh polity
and a thunderstorm happens a very very
violent thunderstorm followed by a very
violent earthquake
and Elijah realizes that God is not in
the earthquake and not in the Thunder
that he is instead the still Small Voice
that's where that phrase comes from so
it's the first
it's the first marked
internalization of the notion of the
deity is that whatever the highest Aid
is is something that you can commune
with internally that is roughly
equivalent let's say to the voice of
conscience and so that's Elijah it's
amazing now what happens in job is so
interesting because
in the story of Job God has a bet with
Satan it's very nasty story right and
the most beautiful it's a brutal story
it's a brutal story it makes you wonder
why it wasn't edited out of the of the
biblical Corpus and the constellation at
the end isn't much because well exactly
exactly and so
um
uh job is a good man and God thinks so
and so does Satan and Satan is invited
by God to have a few words with him and
says I bet you that I can
destroy the faith of your of your good
man job and God says yeah I don't think
so have at her buddy and so job loses
everything and in the most painful
possible Manner and what he does as far
as I can tell is that he uses
that internal guide of conscience which
was now say allied with with the voice
of God in some sense against these
terrible external forces that are
conspiring to bring him down right
because his wife dies and the children
will die children die the cat will die
he's covered in boils yeah and his
friends are making fun of him because
they think he must have done something
to deserve this right so he's like he's
like taken to the bottom of reality but
he refuses to lose Faith now you might
say and and this is where the story I
think transcends something like mere
rationality but we can argue about that
you might say that the logical
consequence
The Logical conclusion from that
misadventure is that job has every
rational reason to shake his fist at the
sky and curse God right but he doesn't
he maintains faith in the goodness of
being despite the fact that he's
suffering dreadfully yeah and and see
that and despite what the voice in the
Whirlwind says to him which is the least
comforting thing that the voice could
say which is uh who a huge quest in the
Lord thy God right right but this is you
see this is so this is such an
interesting issue here because I I've
I've watched people in the Deep throes
of misery and I can tell you that one of
the things that will make misery hell is
in gratitude and so part of the story of
Job seems to me to be an injunction and
that is that no matter what happens to
you and that means in some sense no
matter the facts at hand that you are
called upon never to lose faith in the
essential goodness of the being right to
conduct yourself as if as if
what would you say the cosmos itself is
well structured despite the evidence
that happens to be being presented to
you within the confines of your life and
I think that's the same as I think
that's the same as the practice of
gratitude
um
I'd agree by the way bring that to a
rather maybe
um
not obvious segue but we were also
talking last night about the fact that I
saw you discussed recently uh the
question of euthanasia and uh the way in
which Canadian authorities have been
doing this I mentioned to you that some
some years ago I went to speak with
euthanasia doctors and need patients in
Belgium and the Netherlands they're very
Advanced on this and I wrote several
long essays on the subject it's a
horrible subject to dwell on of course
but actually one of the reasons why I've
always remained exceptionally uh
suspicious of
legalized diet I I I have as we all have
friends who you think at the end I wish
that suffering could just stop yeah so I
recognize that this if you wanted to be
in the hands of the government or or any
more in the hands of the doctor than it
already is let alone in the hands of the
family or anything I'm not sure about
that allow the crossover of
physical suffering to be equated with
mental suffering and you start putting
down depressed uh youths as they are on
the continent or for example have been
giving reasons for a set in Canada
absolutely I mean there's a poor girl
who survived the Brussels Airport attack
she saw most of her classmates blown up
her life didn't really recover and she
was put down
The View laser by the Belgian State last
year at the age of I think 24. now
apart from the insanity of a society
that will not out of principle execute
the perpetrator of an attack but will
kill a victim apart from the insanity of
that and all we know about the genuinely
slippery slope in this area one of the
instincts I realized I had that I just
couldn't let go of was
that there was something fundamental
about us as human beings it means that
it is deeply ungrateful to what we have
to give it up even a minute earlier than
you have to
and that
you know in the end I I quite often
revert to literature but I think it's uh
Gloucester who says in King Leah you
know man must enjoy his going hence even
as his coming hither and that actually
endurance endurance of birth endurance
of death is is part of the cycle but
there is something that but the
resentment you feel for instance when
somebody commits suicide and people
around somebody who commits suicide
very often do you feel resentment as
well as deep Guild is partly you've
broken The Pact to the fundamental level
you've you've you've made all of us
see something we didn't wish to see or
conceived something we didn't mean and
left us powerlessly and left us
powerless and anyhow I mean that's so
independent of whether or not you want
to put the power to euthanize people in
the hands of the state which and the
answer to that is most definitely 100
not well I mean absolutely obviously if
the Canadian government uh can't uh work
out how to organize the banking system
or passport delivery passport delivery
or some of the roads I don't want to
give them life and death
particularly not over mentally ill
people so so when you see people
suffering I mean I saw this in my
clinical practice a lot is that if you
and I saw this with my daughter you know
we we talked to her too about this one
because she was very very ill as a child
and we did everything we could to stop
her from being bitter yeah and the
reason for that and and this is an
interesting
it forces an interesting consideration
of the relationship between facts and
values so she had 40 deteriorating
joints and each of them were painful and
that's a lot of joints and that's a lot
of pain and that was only a few of the
things that were wrong with her and
but had she become resentful and bitter
then she would have had all those
problems plus she would have been
resentful and bitter and as far as I can
tell the way you turn tragedy into hell
is by becoming resentful and bitter now
yeah and yeah now you here's a fact
value problem so you tell me what you
think about this so I she could have
said to me you know Dad given the facts
at hand
The Logical conclusion to derive
so that's an induction let's say The
Logical conclusion to derive is that you
know life is terrible and unjust and it
would be irrational of me not to be
bitter and you know I think and this is
the conundrum that you see in job too is
that
you know when you set up a story so that
someone loses everything you set up the
story so that they have lost everything
and the conclusion to derive from the
loss of everything The Logical
conclusion seems to me almost pro forma
given that you've lost everything is
that you have every right to shake your
fist at the sky yes but the the the
Oddity of it and the Oddity is you know
about resentful people or or bitter
people
is that and again at this point I've
made a lot since the war in the west
came out is uh we are I think we
probably all have the same experience
everyone watching and you and I which is
we've probably all come across very
bitter and resentful people in our Lives
who seem to have quite a good lot
I mean for instance who are financially
secure yeah
um I suspect we've also come across
people who seem to have who have nothing
yeah materially or otherwise who live
lives of gratitude those are the people
that strike you those those people
really strike you when you meet them
absolutely sure but yeah but they seem
this one of the reasons I'm interested
in this is because it seems fascinating
to me that you can have that that you
can have it an attitude which
every socioeconomic thing doesn't
actually matter yeah you know if if if
if you're a resentful person and you're
given a million dollars tomorrow you
will be a resentful person the day after
or the week after as well right this
isn't going to make any difference right
well so that so does that does that
imply
see this is this is I'm trying to
wrestle with the distinction let's say
between faith and and reason let's say
and so like it seems to me first of all
I don't think faith is the willingness
to believe in stupid superstitious
nonsense for which there's no evidence
like which is which is the definition
that is mainly written through the last
few days yes exactly I but I think faith
is a decision to act in Courage and
trust and I think it's a decision to
make that a practice and I think in some
ways it's a decision to make that a
practice God damn it regardless of the
evidence so you know I have a friend who
was brutally tortured in a Canadian
residential school when he was a kid and
you can't listen to what happened to him
without it like tearing you can't listen
to it it's unbelievably brutal and awful
you know and he was devastated by that
um and was on the street for a good
while drinking and and doing drugs and
like tearing himself into pieces and
he he had great grandparents who really
loved him and he was an inheritor of his
cultural tradition a genuine inheritor
and so he he made a decision that he
wasn't going to live
a bitter and resentful life that he
certainly wasn't going to pay that
catastrophe forward with his children he
learned to play he learned to lurk at
himself in the mirror again no and he's
he's conducted himself as a good man for
decades now and that's in it
you already made the case you know that
you see people who have everything in
some real sense and who are bitter and
resentful nonetheless and then you see
people who have nothing who aren't and
so you can take the same set of facts or
even an opposing set of facts and derive
different conclusions and this points at
the fact value problem right is that the
facts don't speak for themselves and
some deterministic Manner and it seems
to me that there has to be something
approximating wow something we've always
defined as a leap of faith in the
positive direction and that that's tied
too it's tied in a strange way to
something you said earlier which is that
you know there are shallow
pleasures and meanings and deep
pleasures and meanings and
the proper faith is Faith In The Deep
pleasures and meanings and so yes and I
I'd add one other thing to that which is
and the end of Faith the the the the
recognition of the depth is telling you
something
yeah well so I've been trying to puzzle
through what depth means technically
let's say
so
um
in the scientific literature
your work is more
is deeper that's one way of thinking
about it the more other people cite it
so it's a dependency Network right so
here's a here's the definition of depth
more ideas are dependent on a deep idea
than
ideas then the number of ideas that are
dependent on a shallow idea absolutely
so it's like criticality right so you
can imagine a web of presumptions with
some presumptions at the fundament okay
so I think that
religious axioms are the deepest
fundamental and I think that I think we
could say that by definition and here's
here's part of the reason at least they
speak to the deepest fundamental well
but but I I think that's part of and
this is where it gets complex again
that's part of the evidentiary structure
you know if you're if you know you have
a profound aesthetic sense and so some
things move you deeply and in principle
those are profound things the the reason
they move you deeply is because they
shift large sections of your perceptual
and conceptual structure simultaneously
rather than the shallow things which are
evanescent and irrelevant and so and I I
think as well that we do in fact feel
movement in the depths
oh yes I mean you you of course you know
it when you feel it
um and that's why music as an art form
is so extraordinary because it it speaks
to a depth that speech can't do right or
it speaks at a register the speech can't
do if you say why why did you find this
particular piece so moving it's often
extremely hard even harder if you're a
musicologist to explain why there are
certain ways you can explain why
um
certain things to do with Harmony
tonality
um a phrase of Music returning to its
its natural firm yeah I mean that's a
very almost all things have moved people
are the resolution yeah
um however long delays is in fact the
longer delayed it is the better the
resolution the greater the satisfaction
in it but it's not just that it's that
sense that this is speaking to us in a
register that we understand
um and we see but we can't quite reach
but it speaks it speaks to my in to my
mind music is the closest thing you have
to religion not because I want to make a
religion of it various people tried that
including Wagner but um but rather that
it's it's the language of religion and
sound
president Trump recently issued this
warning from his Mar-A-Lago home he said
and I quote our currency is crashing and
will soon no longer be the world
standard which will be our greatest
defeat frankly in 200 years there are
three reasons the central banks are
dumping the US dollar inflation deficit
spending and our insurmountable national
debt the fact is there is only one asset
that has withstood famine Wars and
political and economic upheaval dating
back to Biblical times gold Birch gold
can help you own gold any tax sheltered
retirement account that's right Birch
gold will help you convert an existing
Ira or 401K maybe from a previous
employer into an IRA in gold
when currencies fail gold is a safe
haven how much more time does the US
dollar have protect your savings with
gold Birch gold has an A plus rating
with the Better Business Bureau and
thousands of happy customers text Jordan
989898 and get your free info kit on
gold again text Jordan to 989898
[Music]
yeah well and that I would say that's
also that's an embodied
that's an embodied phenomenon rather
than an ABS then a conceptual phenomenon
see I think one of the problems that we
have in the West in our
conceptualization of meaning is that
we're so obsessed with this semantic and
the descriptive that we presume that
meaning itself is secondarily derived
from this semantic and descriptive I
mean the post-modernists make this case
when they say that everything is
encapsulated say in language
game I mean that's a game they've been
playing since the last war uh and my
explanation of it I gave a few books ago
was my explanation for that is that it
was very important after 1945 to keep
philosophy behind police crime Gordon
tape
so what do you do in the philosophy
departments you play language games
so why was it important to do that
oh it's absolutely crucial because
nobody knew how it happened and they
feared that this was one of the
components and we're still working that
out I mean we're still working that out
that's that's why there are certain and
you know as you know if you speak to a
somebody who teaches philosophy at any
University there are several
philosophers with enormous regularity
that always appear as the philosophers
that students want to study like
Nietzsche outranks most people like 30
to one uh um if you're in political
philosophy people love machiaveli
[Music]
um
some might go for Heidegger or something
like that my point is is that they were
known to be dangerous
thinkers well and Heidegger is a good
example is a good example although the
the the the actual texts uh give you
really very little compared to what you
could take from nature if you need
nature badly yeah
um or Machiavelli but uh it's it it's
it's very interesting to me that there
are there is this awareness that
uh philosophy like culture actually in
general which again you can see in the
in the visual arts and others uh in the
last in the latter half of the 20th
century become about not very important
things and it's because there has just
been this fundamental whack
the
the belief that for instance philosophy
can make you good
that art or culture makes you good in
fact it's just had the biggest flow and
you know the answer in the 20 late 20th
century to how did the most civilized
societies on earth end up doing the
worst thing one answer is maybe the
civilization was the problem and a lot
of people took that that idea away
or haven't had the discipline just made
the evil more efficient absolutely I
mean it didn't have the discipline to
disentangle accurately what what could
have happened and what did happen and
what didn't but I think a lot I think I
I've always been sure that the games
that philosophy plays in our day are
games of deliberate distraction because
people aren't sure they can cope with
the questions that they should be asking
and that's a shame but it is very
difficult well you know I I it is very
difficult to cope with that I mean I
spent my whole life I I would say
probably since I was about 13 really
trying to solve the Auschwitz puzzle in
all other Auschwitz puzzle is how could
you enjoy life as an Auschwitz Garden
for me that was an attempt to understand
what happened in Nazi Germany at the
level of the personal it's like well
what sort of person Did you house to be
like in order to do the terrible things
that were done and the answer is well
now and then you were
now and then you were a psychopath but
otherwise yeah
you were like you and me right which
means that we're not the creatures that
we think we are right and that's a very
terrifying so tell me what you think
about this so
I've I've been spending a lot of time
walking through the biblical stories
recently because I'm writing a new book
which is called we who wrestle with God
and it should be out in February and
I've I've thought a lot about
um the crucifixion story
and uh
so one of the things you can say about
the crucifixion story and and Jung said
this was that
um it was it was an archetypal tragedy
and he had a technical reason for that
and and the technical reason for that
was that it's kind of like an AI idea
like a large language model idea imagine
you took all the Corpus of all tragedies
and then you extracted out from that a
meta tragedy which would be like the
essence of tragedy the tragedy of all
tragedy okay and so the the essence of
tragedy is something like the most
unjust possible thing happens to the the
most virtuous person exactly exactly
okay so that's pretty clear right it's
pretty clear that that is the passion
story in essence right and and there's
decorations on it like you're betrayed
by your best friend and not only are you
a good person but even the people who
put you to death know it and your mother
has to see it and you yes exactly your
mother has to see it so like all the
details are in there but you know what's
very interesting about that story is
that it actually doesn't end there
right because there's a mythological
Corpus that's Arisen around the
crucifixion story per se that after
Christ was crucified he had to descend
into hell and hero it and so and the way
I read that psychologically is that you
are called upon if you want to get to
the very bottom of things not only to
face the ultimate tragedy of existence
right to face that full on but that
that's not enough that you actually have
to face the problem of hellish
malevolence itself and that that
actually that's a worse problem than
death
and that and I think maybe the reason
that philosophy degenerated into
triviality following up on your logic
was that it was a lot easier to avoid
the problem than to take on both of
those burdens because I don't think you
can understand Nazism how can you
understand Nazism without journeying to
the Heart of Darkness some by the way
even if you Journey there you may learn
nothing
I mean that's that's as you know is the
worst possible I mean we
in our age we hear people all the time
saying things like the lessons of the
Holocaust yeah so what are you talking
about which lessons and generally right
it generally it devolves into kind of
banality of like be nice to people like
don't don't mass murder people sure okay
right beyond that right uh the devil's
in the details unfortunately details on
this one in fact by the way
it is very hard to say anything new
about Auschwitz and um
you sort of feel everything is being
said that could be said in a way and at
the same time we know nothing about it
but I was very struck Martin Amos who
died recently wrote a novel in the 90s
it was very very controversial at the
time called times Arrow uh everything
goes backwards the whole plot of the
novel goes time is reversed
uh so um if somebody is sick they go to
a pile of sick and inhale it and then
walk happily around their day so it's
anyhow it's a device that that works
well at times as an abusive uh parent
the child is crying the the parents
smacks the child and he stops crying
it's a device that makes you able to
look at things in an interesting way he
but he was much criticized for Demos in
the 90s because he does the Holocaust he
addresses the Holocaust in the book
and everyone said oh you're using it as
a literary device I actually think by
doing what he did
he actually showed one of the very few
new insights I've ever seen about the
Holocaust which is that the people whose
job it is to take the bodies out of the
others
would give birth to these people from
the ovens late in the novel one of them
confines to one of his colleagues that
he's getting nervous because the people
that are there bringing out of the ovens
now don't seem
right
they're more and more disabled
they're more and more ill is it worth
even taking them out of the ovens
so strangely enough by doing it in
reverse you get an idea of how it
started
right you get an idea of how it started
yeah well the thing is the reasonable
things start have start one thing at a
time and in this case Again by a desire
on par for some people to alleviate
suffering or to
um
to to view some lives as less valued
than others perhaps hardly worth living
goes back to what we're saying about
Canada today to view
I I urge people to think of it this way
around because if you think about it
this way around it's much easier to see
how you how you start but
um but the other one that is how things
started in in Nazi Germany too right is
that because the progression towards the
death camps was a progression through
euthanasia and I've looked at a fair
number of the propaganda films from the
mid-30s where the the Nazis were
starting to clean up the asylums you
know and they would go in and like I've
been in backward asylums when I worked
at the Douglas Hospital in the 1980s
there were still people there who had
been on the wards who hadn't been
de-institutionalized who had been on the
wards for like four decades and they
would kind of lurk in the corridors that
were underground at the Douglas hospital
because it was like a University campus
that was connected by underground
passageways and it was like Dante's
Inferno down there I mean and you could
easily you could easily go there and
make the case that you know oh my God is
is the life of being on a backward in a
psychiatric hospital you know wrapped up
in a in a straight jacket for three
decades worth living and
foreign
well that brings that brings that whole
terrible conundrum up in front of you
and
and I there's no there's no like there's
no simple answer you can jump to there
but one of the answers the answer that
that is something that should therefore
be handed to the state to deal with in
some efficient manner that's definitely
not a good but the idea that it's a
question that the individual should
wrestle with is is
naturally the case I mean the the that
this is something people should think
about and we'll always think about as
long as people think it seems to me very
obvious I was I've always been struck by
um one of Elie wiesel's Works uh who is
of course in Auschwitz I don't even know
the trial of God did you ever read that
one no it's it's worth reading and
there's a version of it he replays in
another of his books I think
the gates of the forests called there's
anyhow it was something that I think
Brazil saw in ashes but there was a
night where
um in the in the camp they have the the
some rabbis decide that they will put
God on trial and they visel describes it
in extraordinary detail and it's
riveting the silence in the room and um
uh eventually the case of the
prosecution the case for the uh defense
be given by very very learned rabbis
from Poland and uh nobody could know
more than these men routinely knew
which is a reminder of what was lost but
uh in the end they find God guilty see
the Jews never did that in the Old
Testament well no but then something
very important happened okay okay which
is they find God guilty and there's a
silence
in the heart
when they realize what they've done and
then somebody says one of the rabbis
says okay it's Friday night we need to
go and do our prayers
that's kind of reminiscent of what
happens in the uh in the grand
Inquisitor yes when when The Inquisitor
leaves the door open for Christ right
even though he's doomed him to
hypothetically to death because he's no
longer necessary well you know in the
story of Cain and Abel Cain puts God on
trial
because Kane is making these sacrifices
which are second rate able sacrifices
are lauded in the stories but canes
aren't and there's an intimation that
they're not of the highest quality now
Abel offers up animal uh material to God
and and Cain vegetative material and
that plays into it as well but
Cain calls out God and says essentially
something like you know I'm breaking
myself in half here working on my life
and nothing's going my way and your
favorite son Abel for reasons that I
can't really understand is thriving on
all fronts what the hell is the problem
with the cosmos you created and God says
and I got this from Reading multiple
translations God says
first of all he says if if you do well
will you not be rewarded that's the
first rejoinder and the second rejoinder
is
something like sin crouches at your door
like a sexually aroused predatory animal
and you've invited it in to have its way
with you
and so and I've read a lot of the Diary
materials serial killers and sexual
Slayers and that sort of people and you
can be rest absolutely assured that they
invited that Spirit of resentment in and
have been creatively interacting with it
so I was thinking too you know this
issue of suffering and death you know
imagine that you have a parent let's
particularize it because maybe the
question isn't what should the state do
about
exceptional suffering maybe that's the
wrong level of analysis maybe the right
level of analysis is something like what
would you do if your father was dying in
terrible death
and I would say what you should have
done was live the life that you should
have lived so that at that point of
unbelievable complexity you'd be wise
enough to make the appropriate decision
and to see your way through but that
there would be no way that you could
generalize that decision it would only
have to be made in a particularized
manner absolutely and you wouldn't have
the wisdom to make that decision
properly if you hadn't conducted your
life with exceptional care
uh nobody can make it for you that's for
sure no function that's so one one of
the things that frightened me again as a
clinician was that especially when I saw
people deceiving themselves I thought
well why not deceive yourself if you can
escape from responsibility and pain and
anxiety and if you can gain things
through minimal effort why not deceive
yourself in other people and one reason
to not deceive yourself is that there
will come a time when you're called upon
to make a judgment of Exquisite delicacy
and if you're
fuzzy minded and demented enough because
of your own lies that you're incapable
of such judgment you'll make the wrong
decision and you'll regret being alive
as a consequence well that's that's
that's one good reason not to not to do
something that you're going to regret I
mean um
I I've said for a long time that there
should be a category perhaps there is
one somebody watching can describe it to
me but I've thought for a long time
there should be a category of argument
which is recognized cannot be solved
because somebody involved in the
argument has done the thing and regrets
it deeply but at such a deep level that
they could never
face up to it so and the example I've
always had in my mind is if you have an
argument like the ethics of abortion if
there's one person in the room who's had
an abortion
you're very unlikely to get anywhere in
the discussion because there is somebody
who has everything on the the line
everything at stake and either they
regret it in which case nothing you
can't get anywhere in the discussion
because you don't want to open up that
pit
or they have to pretend not to care in
which case you have another glimpse into
a pit now actually again you and I were
talking about this last night Helen
Joyce made This brilliant observation
about the trans issue recently which was
um that we for the rest of our lives
will all be facing a certain type of
person who cares more about that issue
than anyone else in the world because
they've done the worst possible thing to
their child and they will never concede
itself and or to themselves they will
never concede it
[Music]
um but moving away from that negative if
I may I mean we get back to this thing
of people deceive themselves uh
um uh very often unless somebody comes
along and says
exactly there that's one of the things
I'm fond of of Nietzsche about the
person of resentment is Nature's
observation that the secular priests
would be required to stand over the
person's life and say you are right
there is somebody who has destroyed your
life in this world the person is you now
our mutual friend Anthony Daniels
said that when he was a prison doctor he
was one of the few people actually used
to do this with his yeah yeah he's a
remarkable person he's a wonderful man
and
um that's Theodore Dell rimple for those
of you know listening he's written great
books and he had the observation he told
me once that his um he quite often
imprisoned would have people coming to
him saying oh doctor I think I'm uh I
think I need some pills some
antidepressants
why would you why do you want
antidepressants I go uh I think I'm
depressed why do you think you're
depressed I'm I think I'm suffering from
low self-esteem he said he would reply
well there's one thing you've got right
almost without exception whenever he did
this the patient laughed yeah because
they've been caught out right the point
is you're in prison for doing a terrible
crime you ought to be depressed that's
why it's a Penitentiary that's why it's
a Penitentiary you ought you ought to be
suffering you you ought to be
questioning your self-esteem at this
point this is a very good time to do it
and you want it for like a decade yeah
and you wouldn't like medicalize it away
and the state maybe shouldn't help you
too easily medicalize away whatever
you're feeling in that situation but I
was always struck by that story because
I thought
how few adults I always say that there
are so few adults in the room these days
but there are so few adults who will
stand over the life of anyone and say
I'm sorry buckho but it's you
and I I had this you know it's so funny
because
one of the reasons that my lectures have
become popular
is because I have done that for young
men yeah right and I and suggest to them
well if you're miserable
it's possible it's because you're
useless and you're not doing what you
should be doing and you you you could
think perversely and should think likely
that why in the world would that
possibly be a salable message you know
and the answer is well
if the person that you're addressing is
genuine genuinely miserable and hopeless
and you say well maybe there's something
that you're not doing quite right then
they now have an Avenue of movement
forward right and if you say instead
well it's no wonder you're miserable
because the cosmos and the patriarchy
yeah are structured such that you're
you're and you're a victim of
circumstance without recourse I I had
this reason I was on a program the other
day where um there was a a black British
woman on who claimed to have suffered
Hurt From Slavery and I I I'm fed up
with that claim now I said you've not
suffered anything you haven't suffered
any hurt and no one alive has caused you
the hurt now of course a lot of people
will say who are you to say that you're
just a another privileged white guy or
something but I actually think it's
necessary to say that to people because
uh actually it's Clarence Thomas points
out in his recent supreme court judgment
on affirmative action
um if you don't get that out of the way
the rest of history is going to be a
competitive grievance competition and so
you actually need people to say no I I'm
not I'm not falling for this you may
have fallen for it you may have decided
that everything in your life would be
sorted out if reparations were paid to
you by the state of California I'm not
convinced that would help you I think
you'd have a fantastic shopping binge
for a few days and be as un unpleasant
and unhappy a week from Tuesday as you
are today and
um but but it's it's very striking that
there's something missing in in our
societies of people saying that of just
saying you know
we're not going along with your
self-perception and that's on so many
things we're not going along with your
with your self-perception and agreeing
to it not just because it's bad for you
but it's bad for all of us it's about
yeah it's bad for them and for all of us
simultaneously yeah and you know that
one of the things I've been really
shocked by I would say with regard to my
fellow therapists
is there absolute cowardice and almost
universally so
um yeah I assume how it is on behalf of
almost everybody so
I I don't expect heroism in our ages
it's wonderful when it happens but you
should I think I think it's particularly
egregious on the therapeutic front with
regard to self-identity yeah because
every so here's here's two things that
every psychologist who's actually
trained knows
if if they are worthy of the name the
first is
identity is negotiated by anyone who
isn't to like literally by three you
negotiate your identity and if the whole
the definition of being a civilized
person
is that you negotiate your identity and
you do it constantly I mean you and I
sitting here in open dialogue
are negotiating our identities right
because we're attempting to modify the
manner in which we perceive ourselves
and present ourselves as a consequence
of exchanging information we couldn't
even talk well of course the people who
pushed the self-identity Mantra also
claim that there's no such thing as free
speech right there's there's no honest
exchange of ideas between men of of good
faith let's say or Goodwill so so that's
one thing psychologists know and they
absolutely know this and part of what
you do as a psychologist if you have any
sense at all is you teach people how to
negotiate their identity more
effectively and so
the second thing that psychologists know
is that
you expose people
voluntarily to the things that frighten
them
yes instead of protecting them you know
in this trigger warning fashion and all
psychologists know that that that kind
of over
what that overprotective attitude is
definitely a pathway to Psychopathology
and yet no one will stand up and say
that it's it's I I have a habit which I
learned from a late friend was a
journalist which I've tried to stick
with throughout my adult life of always
going to one dangerous country a year
and
um I I do it for lots of reasons one is
just curiosity in the world uh another I
suppose is that it is one of to go about
what we're saying earlier one of the
best ways to actually feel a sense of
gratitude about where you're from and
what the good things are in your success
yeah because unless you've seen a
society at War
um you don't understand quite how
blessed State pieces I mean um
uh and how easily what happens to other
people could happen to you
um but there are other reasons to do it
and what a miracle it is that that isn't
happening all the time everywhere
absolutely it has it because that's
that's the state of nature that was
right yes absolutely I mean um that's
one of the things that pink is right on
in the blank slate is uh deaths in
tribal societies pre-modernity
way higher the the violent deaths way
higher even than the average violent
deaths of a European male in the 20th
century so right right um so yes to some
extent this is this is a natural state
but I I also do it just partly because I
I learned so much about about how
societies deteriorate
um
and uh and as a as a sort of very very
minimal final thing you always find out
something about yourself
it's it's never the purpose of doing it
but there is well somewhere well okay so
so here's here's a very interesting
clinical finding
um it was a revolutionary
Discovery in the 50s 50s that's about
right so
do psychoanalysts following Freud would
walk people through
what they wanted to avoid and they did
that autobiographically right by going
back into the past and there's some
utility in that the behaviors came along
and what they did instead was
expose people to what they were afraid
of Here and Now
so for example
if you were afraid of balloons which is
rare but does happen upon occasion
um
a therapist would
sit you down have you relax run you
through a relaxation exercise maybe show
you a picture of balloon ask you to
imagine it then put a balloon you know
15 feet away and then took 10 feet away
and eight feet away and then a balloon
on your lap and maybe that takes a
number of sessions and then the fear
would disappear now the theory was the
reason the fear disappeared was because
you paired the exposure with relaxation
right okay but then it was discovered
that you didn't have to pair it with
relaxation and it still worked okay you
could be in a hyper you could be in a
sort of hyper as long as you're the way
I stay as long as you're doing it
voluntarily interesting you have to do
it voluntarily right okay so then the
psychoanalysts rejoined her to the
behaviorists was
um you know the the person isn't really
afraid of a balloon or an elevator
they're really afraid of death and if
you eradicate the specific fear it will
just move Locale because you're not
dealing with the root cause okay now
that also turned out to be wrong because
what happened is if you exposed people
to say three things they were afraid of
they would go out voluntarily
voluntarily and expose themselves to all
sorts of other things that they were
afraid of so you didn't make them less
afraid you made them braver which is
very different yeah right and so what
you did with exposure therapy was what
it was that you transformed people's
conceptualizations of themselves you
transformed their conceptualization of
themselves from passive victim of
malevolent circumstances to active
Contender with challenge seriously maybe
I've been doing maybe I've been
um on wittingly doing this to myself all
my life
um I remember the first time I I was
covering a conflict uh
there were Rockets landing and it was as
it actually is it's quite exhilarating
if if you if you're in a it isn't if you
have no choice to be there a war
correspondence I think it's frame to see
a problem of the job that you can find
it existing well that's that distinction
between voluntary and involuntary too
and the Winston Churchill famously said
there's no greater feeling than the
feeling of being shot at without
resolved
um it's an enormously uh uh enlivening
uh thing that you feel you think not
today death not today
um and um but the first time I was ever
in a in a conflict where there were
Rockets Landing I funnily enough when I
got back from the area where it was
happening it got
back on the first evening my immediate
Instinct was this very strange one to me
which I thought about a lot afterwards
which was that I thought I could look my
grandparents in the face
now what I mean by that is I'm all my
grandparents are long dead by then but
what I meant was
they'd all gone through the blitz or the
second world war right
um and I'd always wondered how on Earth
you coped with that
and I suddenly sort of thought oh I see
it's like that so I would say what you
did okay so there's a mythological tone
to all of the things that you just
related so the first thing you said was
that perhaps you had been doing this
unwittingly in some sense your whole
life well one of the things that
psychologists eventually figured out was
that well people are unwittingly doing
this their whole life because that's how
you learn yes the way you learn is by
facing an optimized challenge yes
voluntarily and that pushes you slightly
beyond your current limits now that's
that's where meaning emerges right right
that's so meaning is the Instinct that
puts you on the edge of transformation
yeah so you think I'm going to learn
something from this yes you're gonna and
you may learn something about the world
or where you are in the world but you
may also learn something about yourself
or change as a consequence right and so
the Instinct of meaning actually puts
you on that it puts you on the edge of
chaos okay but the grandfather so so
that's the heroic path by the way but
the grandfather comments extremely
interesting too the grandparent because
one of the tropes mythological Trope is
that if you go into the belly of the
Beast you can rescue your forefathers
from the belly of the beast that's
Pinocchio in the whale well that's what
you did in some ways when you I think I
just wanted to know if I would if I
could sort of stand uh
I I just always thought that that
generation the heroism what they went
through right I just thought you know
you always have that thing of what would
one do in that situation how would one
behave
you know
um and and even just getting the
smallest glimpse of okay I think I could
hold it together that means that you you
Kindle that inside you the spirit that
you saw in your grandparents that you
admired you kindled inside by that
exposure and you said that brought you
to a position of you know not full
equivalence but at least partial
equivalence right well so here's part of
what happens so if you expose yourself
to optimize challenge well first of all
you gather more information so these
countries you went to eh I mean you're
learning about the countries you're
learning about yourself that's pure
information but here's something else
that happens this is so cool so
if you put yourself in a new situation
new genes turn on inside you and they
activate parts of you that have not yet
come alive yes right right
no kidding so then you might say so
there's there's a there's a maze at
shark Cathedral
I think it's a chart
and the there's an idea in the Maze so
you enter one side of the maze it's
about 40 feet across and then you have
to walk every quadrant
Northwest south and north east south and
west every quadrant and if you've walked
every quadrant you get to the center the
center is also the center of the Cross
right so that's the place of maximal
suffering but there's an idea there and
and Redemption there's an idea there and
the idea is that if you go absolutely
everywhere every bit of you will turn on
right and so and a fair bit of that is
right right exactly and well and you
know this we know this is true and you
think well how could it be any other way
right because and you know too these
experiences that you had where you're
voluntarily confronting what's dangerous
that changes you in a way that can't be
attained by anyone who hasn't had that
experience right right if you haven't
pushed yourself to your limit yeah
especially I would say with regard to
the fear of death then you there's a
change that hasn't occurred within you
and I would say it's a fundamental
change of maturation so it's definitely
I mean it's definitely an enormous
enlivening feeling
uh I would say
um and uh so what what do you think was
at the core of the enlivening element of
it I mean you said it was hardly having
cheated death but that is but that's not
all it is right because you also
I I had a client
who was terrified of death enough to
dose herself with sleeping pills
constantly to be unconscious
and
she had a dream
and in Her Dream the figure she saw was
a dwarf in a forest told her that unless
she could learn to work in a
slaughterhouse she wouldn't be able to
graduate from University wow and so so
we we talked to stream through and I
said well I don't think I can arrange to
have you visit a slaughterhouse she
wouldn't eat meat by the way and she
couldn't go into a butcher store wow so
I said I don't I can't get you into a
slaughterhouse but maybe you could think
of something that you could do that um
would be equivalent why don't you think
about it for a week and so she came back
and said I think I'd like to see an
embalming
so I called up some furniture Funeral
Parlor directors like right then and
there and I said I have this client
who's terrified of death you guys deal
with death all the time she has this
sense that if she came and saw embalming
that it might be helpful to her and we'd
also like to talk to you about how the
hell you do this because you face death
every day and like she can't face it at
all and so and they were very very
understanding and just said yes and so
we went there two weeks later and I'm
very squeamish about that sort of thing
as well you know about about that kind
of gross physicality let's say and so it
wasn't something that you know I would
just wrap off as if it was nothing but
she my client was absolutely terrified
but it was so interesting and this is
part of the enlivening elemental so
we're in the hallway
separated from the
surgical room so to speak where the
embalming was taking place which is a
very visceral occurrence as you all the
bodily fluids train for example and yeah
and
for the first first of all she went
to the funeral parlor second she sat in
the hallway third when this first
started she was looking to decide hey
but she do this
and then every time she did that she'd
look a little longer until finally she
was watching it completely and then she
said you know can I go in the room can I
put my hand on the body they put her on
a glove and she did that you know and
now
what happened to her and this was so
interesting because she had a lot of
neurotic concerns and part of them
reflected her own sense of her own
weakness
she came out of that knowing that she
was a lot less weak than she thought
because she could do it
right she didn't think she was that sort
of creature and it turned out that she
was that sort of creature and quite
quickly this
the
learning that about yourself
yeah I mean is so to be encouraged so to
be encouraged because the first thing
that happens I'm struck by your example
the first thing that happens is looking
away
that's that's the most natural of
instincts and we all have it I mean
you'd have to be have something slightly
wrong not to
uh but to train yourself to be able to
look at the thing that that terrifies
you whether it's death or something ugly
um is uh it seems to me at any rate that
it's it's one of the one of the things
that drives me is that if you look at
enough and as long as you don't tip over
into the void if you look at enough you
can get to that place of Stillness
um there's an uh a metaphor that's
always on my mind from the end of evil
and War's Decline and fall where a very
curious man who's uh an architect in the
book and a rather minor figure
is at the very end when it's the whole
plot but at the very end after all the
terrible things have happened to various
people and the human comedy of the whole
disaster of the novel uh the one the
main characters sees this architect
there's some serious figure sitting
um uh watching this Fairground ride and
the fairground ride is one where uh uh
this this thing spins round
and there's a net around the outside and
people pay a shilling and they go on
they try to climb up the side and
they're flung to the sides all the time
and I think his name is Miss Dr Salinas
is just watching this there's all the
people and he says how how um how how
loud they laugh and how they cackle and
how they get flung around and how they
and they all try to get to the top and
he says occasionally the circus pays for
somebody who knows how to do it to get
to the top and sit there
and he says that's where you want to be
because at the top in the center you
totally still that's there's no
centrifugal force there okay so I have I
have a I'm curious about something you
you made a comment earlier about the
fact that your more natural presumption
now is to assume that cowardice will be
the order of the day yes okay so there's
something about you that's always struck
me and like I've met a lot of people
over the last six years particularly and
I've met a lot of people who have
remained silent when they shouldn't and
I've met a few people
who will speak but they're rare you know
I've probably met 50 or 100 now who will
speak and you're one of them and I and
hersley is another one right and there
are these people who Jonathan height is
another one right they don't remain
silent no and so
now you talked about a pattern through
your life of going farther and going
places that challenged you like and you
talked about the fact that you have seen
cowardice as the order of the day
especially that willingness to stay
silent okay you're not one of those
people
do you as far as I can tell do you know
do you know why and does it is it tied
into that proclivity
is it tied somehow into that proclivity
to push
um well naturally I didn't think of
myself as a particularly Brave person
there's a lot of people I know who I do
think of as brave but um
uh
I I I've always wanted to make sure I
didn't uh not say what I saw I mean
that's why
it would be so embarrassing humiliating
self-umiliating I I couldn't live with
myself if I if I yeah but I don't think
anybody can live with himself if they do
if they fail to do that
um well so so the fact the fact that you
observe well maybe you it may be that
people
don't know that so explicitly like my
experience has been that everyone who
remains silent when they have something
to say pays for it oh right well he so I
I somebody said to me years ago uh that
they thought that what motivated me with
the head of a very I have a very low
tolerance threshold for lies I just
don't like them I I hate being told
um and the particularly big big lies on
the you know sort of let's all pretend
that we now agree to this thing today
that we didn't agree to yesterday I I
can't do it I just won't do it and I
suppose one of the things that also
motivates that is that the people I
liked and the people I admire are like
that I mean
Ayan I've known ion for 20 years and I
mean actually somebody somebody said
something interesting I think it's my
40th birthday that said are you aware
you've surrounded yourself with
courageous people and I said I wasn't
actually but actually it was true around
the table there were some people like
Ayan or a friend of mine was very brave
in the conflict in Northern Ireland and
and other people you know academics I
know who I like who I think you know and
I actually hadn't particularly noticed
it but it's true
um now there's two two lessons I took
from that one is
um I just like courageous people I like
people who say what they think and
they're much more fun of course and
they're much better friends and you have
the most time and you actually get
somewhere because you don't have to all
lie to each other yeah and all that sort
of thing you actually get to somewhere
in the discussion and that's that's a
pretty good idea the second thing is
probably I I thought actually maybe it
is deliberate because I probably
recognized rightly I think that if you
uh surround yourself or near courageous
people it's more likely you'll be
courageous yourself so for instance
um you know sometimes people say Well if
you know you said this thing and
everyone hates you for it
and I genuinely I don't care now why do
I not care because I only care about a
small number of people who whose opinion
I care for
um and
um
and I I don't understand why why
everyone cares about the opprobrium of
millions if you have four people three
people who you admire and who you know
in my EU and you're fine I don't think
it I I I I okay so so let me ask you
about that admiration you know so I've
thought a lot about
about admiration because I think
admiration is
what it's a manifestation of the
religious instinct
yeah so
so because to admire someone is if you
admire them enough you're awestruck in
their presence yeah that would be the
ultimate manifestation of admiration and
awe is a primarily a primary religious
experience right it's the experience of
seeing something that's beyond you in a
manner that's compelling right yeah and
so
and you said you admire
people who tell the truth yes and so
what I would what I'm curious about if I
said to you is there any difference
between that and the religious
Proclamation let's say that the truth
will set you free right that's part of
the doctrine of the word right and so I
mean we and I have had discussions and
and more more and more of them with
people like Jonathan pajo about
what
um a moral
system has to be grounded in right and
the humanist types we sort of began our
conversation today with this the
humanist types think that you can ground
morality in something like a system of
facts and see I don't I don't think
that's true and I think it's actually
technically untrue I think that we
ground morality in something like
God it's something like the religious
Instinct and and I I'm trying to figure
that out technically like
certainly one of the things that orients
who morally is the sense of admiration
yes well then you might ask yourself
what
provokes admiration appropriately and
naturally and we can say well courage
does courage does definitely encouraged
us right should yes but but I think it
almost invariably does like yes you have
to work really hard as we are in our age
to discourage people fire and courage
right right well and you even see among
bad guys let's say like if you look at
mafioso movies I mean
the the mafioso villain types are at
least courageous yes right yes so they
have their own system of ethics and they
have their rights yes yes yes and so
even though you might not say that
that's the most profound set of
orienting guidelines because it's
criminal in this orientation it's not
nothing and there is a certain amount of
courage and you you could also point out
and and this is sort of what would you
say it comment on the necessity of
integrating the shadow is that
someone who's
forthright enough to be a mafioso at
least isn't terrified into dependent
neuroticism yes right right right so
there's kind of there's a hierarchy of
virtue and the forthright bad guy isn't
the lowest entity right so so so
there are
valid markers for admiration right
courage
um I think Brotherhood in some sense is
also that's something you also alluded
to you know you said that you noticed
that you had aggregated around you
um people who were willing to speak
their minds and I think the reason for
that likely is is that
if you speak your mind and you pay the
price and you reap the benefits of that
pay the price for that reap the benefits
other people who've done that notice yes
and you find them and they find you I
mean that certainly that's happened as
I've risen to notoriety yeah so and
that's also a huge reward yes right
absolutely so is is it is the
opportunity to meet people in different
spheres you've done great things and
that's I mean that's an enormous uh uh
benefit of the life I live and I'm sure
the life you live is is incalculable uh
you know a gift of of meeting people
who've done extraordinary things
and from a bewildering array of
backgrounds you know I mean it's like I
don't know my last circle of people who
we know and are friends with I think but
I think there's nothing they have in
common other than probably
a similar
desire to say the truth is they see it
to do so in the face of whatever comes
their way and that might be uh the only
park or uh it might be
there's no commonality of background
experience and by the way then that's
one of the things I would say is that
we're to encourage people is the the in
that case like you can do it too yeah
right and
you know I I one of the reasons I'm sort
of rather actually optimistic about the
Next Generation coming along in America
and in the western democracies in
general is that I think they've I think
the smarter ones I'm sure you see this
all the time the smarter ones have all
seen through the the dogma of the day
and they don't like it
and although there are these sorts of
Prim sensorious
you know tittle tattle Telltale people
in their 20s and some prophetic people
in their 30s and 40s and so on
nevertheless the people coming up in
their teens and early 20s now have seen
through those people they don't like
them they're right not to like them
um and so actually that's why they look
to people like Joe Rogan right and and
they're they're right to look they are
they are because he's very successful
very funny very smart very tough very
tough lives the life he wants to live as
you know if you go to Joe's Studios
pretty much what I say what at the age
of about 15 you thought you'd do yeah if
you've got some cats yeah yeah that's
that's really great I mean you know and
um I think that the more that happens
the more people see there's a way
through the the more we'll have the sort
of aggregated okay so so so let me ask
you this that you know you said that you
can't for one reason or another you
can't or you have decided not to abide
lies and so I would ask you to what
degree
has the adventure of your life that's
good way of thinking about it being a
consequence of exactly that
so I've been here well let me let me
I've started to understand you tell me
what you think of this so
you can use language two ways
you can either
decide what you want from someone before
you talk to them and then you can craft
every word that you utter in order to
extract that that's instrumental use of
language
I've talked to lots of journalists who
do that for sure or you can just sit
down and you can say what you think
and see what happens and those are very
very now this is what Rogan does is in
his interviews he just says what he
thinks and he sees what happens now
the advantage to the former
strategy is that
in principle you get what you want but
the disadvantage is well you might have
to manipulate people and they'll catch
on to that and and the second in more
profound disadvantage is what the hell
do you know about what you want you know
it's not like you're transparent to
yourself yes and so you might have some
bloody scheme that you think you're
seeing through and you might manipulate
to get it but that doesn't mean it'll be
good for you when you get it and so you
could contrast that instead with a
different proposition which is and I
think this is a correct proposition
and I think it's the maybe the
fundamental religious proposition
possibly is that
whatever happens if you are acting in
accordance with the truth
is the best thing that could have
possibly happened regardless of how it
seems to you at the time and and so
that's you know that's a dubious
proposition but here's one that's not so
dubious I think although I do think it's
true
if you have to let go of the
consequences of your words because
you're just going to let the cards fall
wherever they're going to fall
you get to have an adventure because you
don't know what the hell's going to
happen absolutely yeah okay so you think
absolutely okay absolutely why do you
think that the the the of course it's
the most exciting thing because you'll
actually be often on an adventure which
is
predicated on an idea which I believe to
be true which is that the point of Truth
is not just the sort of
it's not a game it's to get you
somewhere you know um and it's like the
search for meaning you either you either
you either devolve I think I said this
with you and Jonathan before you are you
either devolve into the sort of idea
that we're meaning seeking creatures but
there's no meaning or you say we're
meaning seeking creatures and there's a
there's a reason for that and the reason
is it's because we're hoping to get
somewhere
you hope
that if you if you you know it sounds
like that's life huffle but I mean if
you trade in truth if you if you if if
you if you follow your instinct towards
truth you're bound to make some missteps
you're bound to get some things wrong as
everybody does but the orientation of
where you're going to is correct it is
correct and at the end of it
whatever it was you were meant to be in
your life is more likely to be what
you'll be than if you set off in error
and deliberately suppress what you
believed and what you wanted so so
here's a here's a corollary to that also
I would say is that if you say what you
think then it's you saying and you
thinking and that means that whatever
happens is your life
but if you engage in falsehood
yeah then
I think you're the devil's puppet
fundamentally but and the reason I think
that is because if you're engaging in
falsehood then whatever it is that
you're saying and thinking
it isn't You by definition because
it's not it's not what you think and you
you can you can you can you can tease
that out of people rather like
Philadelphia did without those prisoners
you could tease it out with people we
Supply people like Joe or something in
comedy because my late friend Clive
James had his beautiful saying he he
wrote Somewhere he said uh he said
common sense and humor are the same
thing moving at different speeds
humor is just common sense dancing huh
now
um I love this this quote and it one of
the things that says gesture about it is
a comedian
or indeed anyone any of us who tell a
joke
if it's a good joke irrespective of
whether or not it's offensive to some
person
people laugh and the laughter is the
recognition that what has happened is is
real
it's reality dancing
um it's reality riffing on itself at a
highest transcending itself absolutely
and one of the greatest things why I'm
very confident that if you have enough
comedians in our society who are good we
might get out of yes because those are
the 10 good men inside them by them
right who dare to tell the truth exactly
and and and they and the the fact that
the RAS might need to rely on comedians
will tell us something about our age but
nevertheless uh uh if you make somebody
laugh about the thing they recognize it
and they laugh quite often there's a
type of person who will then uh pull
back because they've basically admitted
that they also recognize this thing to
be true because otherwise they wouldn't
have found it funny they wouldn't be
able to laugh about it because laughter
wouldn't be the response the
responsibility well it's interesting
quite often they laugh and then
yeah yeah yeah well it's interesting too
there and this points to something like
an instinct for the truth because one of
the things I was really struck by when I
had little kids was how early their
sense of humor developed it's
ridiculously early like it's there at
nine months for sure yeah if you you can
coax it out of them but certainly by the
time kids are two they're doing
ridiculously Clowny things all the time
and
that and it struck me because
it's pre-linguistic even it's so deep
that sense of humor and I I do think
it's part of the orientation towards
truth it's the it's the playful
orientation towards truth well that's
why according to my name is earlier but
I mean he he famous he said well I said
the reason you should be suspicious of
people with no sense of humor isn't just
they don't know what's funny they don't
know what's serious either and
um and that is yeah well the funniest
comedians are the ones that can take the
most serious thing and make it funny oh
yeah absolutely and which is why I dare
to do that the Monty Python troop was
great at that yeah I mean that's why
everything is also dangerous to be a
comedian in this stage because everyone
can take it out of context the other day
um and pretend that you're doing
something you weren't but if if in a
good faith environment uh yes the these
are the the people who can point to
things we all know to be true we get to
laugh at them and with them and this
this reveals something very important in
our ear it seems to me which is the
people that you and I spend a certain
amount of Our Lives railing against and
we should get onto some positives but
the the railing against is in part
because they are censorious bullets they
want to tell you and me and and everyone
else what we should find funny what we
should read what we should say what we
should think how we should act and in my
mind it's an invitation which I decline
but
in that case these people who are so
primed so unfunny so tediously
repressive in everything they do don't
stand a chance in the long run
yeah if 10 comedians can take down a
million
social justice activists and I reckon
they can then I I
bet long on the comedians
we're gonna move very quickly to the
Daily wire plus side and I'll ask you
about this about the development of that
sense of Truth
um let me see here what else I'd like to
ask you about
okay so let's go back to what we
discussed right at the beginning which
is this this idea of purpose
so
you said that meaning gets you somewhere
yeah right okay so that I think that's
exactly right by the way my I called my
first book maps of meaning because I
understood I came to understand that
meaning was actually a navigation guide
right yes right and yeah yeah and and I
actually I actually think that's
technically true because meaning
manifests itself is the Instinct that
tells you that you're on the path to the
proper goal yes as I say that it's um if
you wreck you can Orient Yourself by
seeing the flares on the path yes yes
yes well that and that's part of the
idea of of calling by by the way it's
also part of the fact and this is an
interesting fact that people are beset
with their own
particularized problems you know so
um I learned in The Exodus seminar that
I ran a while back you know when the
Israelites were lost in the desert God
Appears to them as a pillar of light
during the day and a pillar of a pillar
of Darkness during the day and a pillar
of light at night and Jonathan pajo made
the claim that that was the same idea as
the yin and yang idea in taoism and that
there's this tension of opposites that
guides you
um and here's a way of thinking about it
is that you'll find a calling in your
life and things will beckon to you as
opportunities now not everything beckons
to you as an opportunity no but some
things do and that's the positive side
that would be the light let's say in the
darkness on the negative side there's
going to be things that aggregate around
you as your problems right in their
things that bug you and God Only Knows
Why those things bug you because there's
a trillion things that could but some
things really grip you and won't let you
go right and you could think about the
interaction between opportunity and
problem as something like calling right
and then the truthful grappling with
that produces that not only that a sense
of meaning because you're taking your
responsibility seriously and and taking
advantage of your opportunities but it
also propels you down the appropriate
developmental path because if you take
on the problems that beset you that are
yours you'll develop and if you exploit
the opportunities that present
themselves you'll develop as well yeah I
am I mean Drive is
something that fascinates me because
there's a sort of presumption is it
where people either have it or they
don't and you know that that is the case
to some degree I mean it's certainly a
there's certainly very driven people and
there are all sorts of reasons we know
why some people have driven and from an
early age and why that might be but and
we're struck by this lack of talking
about vocation in our era I don't know
if it's because people are embarrassed
about it some people undoubtedly are
um or whether it's just that we don't
particularly encourage it uh it's
probably a combination of all of these
things plus a sort of sense that there's
no particular meaning yeah why bother
you know
um everything's been shown to be flawed
so all ambition is pathological and
destructive yes and and there's
different ways of
of of of passing it but I I I'm I've
always been struck by something Alan
Bloom said in one of the early parts of
the closing the American mind he said
and he said even then in the 80s it
concerned him that he said we know what
we know what a beautiful body would be
like we don't any longer know what a
beautiful soul would be like
and although that's a rather High way of
saying it
um I would say we don't know what a
we haven't agreed what a meaningful life
would be really and I once asked a
sociologist friend about this I said
what what do you think in your life has
been the biggest change and he said I
think the biggest change in my life is
that if you were a Man Who provided for
your family and your dependence whatever
your jaw you were a man of deepness and
that isn't the case anymore you know you
could you can work very hard for people
who are your dependents or someone
else's dependence but you're the mark
you know so there's a lot of there's a
lot of sort of demoralization around
that I think and I I I'm very keen that
we as it were
we rectify the demoralization you know
we we did a series of studies on Vision
development
um I built this program with some
colleagues of mine to help people
develop a vision and
the first part of the exercise is that
you
contemplate yourself five years in the
future yes and then you adopt an
attitude of appropriate respect for
yourself so you try to put yourself
people don't necessarily want the best
for themselves or think they deserve it
and so it's useful to uh entice people
into giving themselves the benefit of
the doubt for a moment and letting them
contemplate the notion that it might be
okay if they were successful yeah and
then the next part of the exercise is
well right for 15 minutes about what you
could have and who you would be if you
could have what you needed if you were
treating yourself properly and if you
were the person you want to be just
write it down just get it out and then
we have them do the reverse which is
imagine that your idiocy took the upper
hand and that you created your own
particularized hell out of your
stupidity what would that look like or
now you've got polls right it's like not
there that would be better then we have
them break the pause division down into
seven sub elements family friendships
career Etc and say just make a plan yeah
all right so we gave this to college
students in three different campuses 50
decrease in Dropout this is with a
90-minute exercise particularly
effective for young minority men who had
poor academic backgrounds wow yeah no
kidding and a 35 increment in grade
point average wow right yeah yeah well
so that's that's part of that that
Conjuring up a vision and we're trying
to do that you know this because you're
involved in this art project in in the
UK we're trying to do that on a more
International scale even though there's
perils to that and that's partly well
how could we formulate a vision of the
future that was positive and
Invitational instead of fear-based and
and and what serving the demented
interests of power mongers how about how
about that yeah or the or the one I I
dislike the most which is I think you
and I have talked about it before when
the last time Roger scrutin appeared in
public we did a discussion together just
a few months before he died and and we
we got talking about this strange way in
which the era wishes you just to be
harmless right to come in and out and
not be noticed yeah
if all ambition is pathological then
harmless yeah all you're doing is
emitting carbon yeah if it weren't for
you the damn moss and trees would be
getting on just fine and yeah yeah you
just pull everyone's teeth out and wrap
them up in styrofoam and set them in a
corner and the planet would get along
just fine
exactly human beings are the problem
when in fact in fact we're the point
well you know Douglas that's probably a
good that's a good that's probably a
good place to end oh there was one other
thing we were going to talk about this
is relevant to vocation as well Barry
Weiss invited you to contribute to her
new Enterprise and you decided to do
that in a particular way you're already
writing columns and so you weren't
particularly interested in doing more of
that having been doing enough of it what
are you doing with Barry it was a
brilliant idea of hers she wanted me to
do a column for the Free Press and I
said well I'm sort of columned up uh I
wrote about three or four columns a week
and uh on various issues of the day and
uh and she said well I want you to write
about something else and I particularly
and I said well look I've always tried
to have a deal with my editors and I
write about something I love for every
piece about something or someone I hate
and actually the the uh the um the
equilibrium has never been quite right
on there though
there's much more news coverage in the
things that annoy you uh um but
nevertheless I do try to write about
things I love and it was Barry's idea
she said well look whenever I want to
stage with you you always sort of seem
to have things you can pluck out of
their quotes you know from things why
don't you just explain why you got them
in your head and where they're from and
why you think they're worth having there
and so we came up with this idea is and
every week I write a column about a poem
I have by heart sometimes it's a
long-ish poem sometimes it's a few lines
and really it's about about why it's why
it's up there how much poetry do you
know by heart
well I'm doing 50 poems by for for this
year
um ranging from
well I mean it's it's mainly within what
you'd think of as the can the classical
Canon yeah Western so why did you why
did you start doing that well there's
several reasons
um one is if if there's something I read
which hits me uh in the solar plexus
yeah yeah I want it up there
yeah that's a very strong I I think oh I
need I need that and do you know why you
need it well then there's that the
answer to that is and I actually
addressed this in one of the opening
columns uh there are several people who
made a great impression on me when I was
growing up one was a sermon I heard from
Terry wait who was a captive in uh
Lebanon in the 80s because he was taking
hostage uh
um uh after being the Emissary of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and I heard him
give a a sermon as a Schoolboy where he
talked about when he was chained to a
Beirut radiator for about five years
right
um he um he one of the things that made
it uh bearable was that he had four
quartets by T.S Eliot in his head
and he he recited the opening uh
time present and time passed both
perhaps contained in time future
and he did that whole opening
which culminates in that great footfall
Deco in the memory down the passage
which we did not take through the door
we never opened into the Rose Garden
and when he uh there was something
immediately struck me I immediately went
back to my room and got my Elliot off
the the shelf and finally understood
Elliot or began to understand Elliott
for the first time but the other thing
was
and I wrote this recently in a in a
column about an extraordinary Russian
woman who who should be who should be
better known called Tatiana grenadich
now she was a woman I tell the story in
the piece and his I've only seen it in
one other English uh uh um version
she was a woman who was uh studied
English literature in Saint Petersburg
uh in the 1930s and 40s
the height of the Terrors she uh was
actually denounced at her University
because one of her forebears had
translated uh I think it was uh Ovid
into Russian and she was very proud of
this forebear but somebody denounced her
as having Noble lineage oh yes so she
was denouncing thrown out of the
University she was eventually allowed
back in
and to cut a long story short but it's
an amazing story she um
uh ended up after she was at the siege
of Saint Petersburg her house was burned
down and her mother was killed in about
1944 so she handed herself into the
authorities she'd got it into her head
that wanting to go to England
constituted activity against the state
that was how bad it was the sense that
you were doing wrong it's like trying to
leave California right she uh she handed
herself in and um she was given straight
away 10 years in gulag and uh she on the
night she was at the holding prison she
was told by the guard
um you know there are books in the
prison before you're taken to Gulag and
you could she you know and she said shut
up I'm working
and he said what are you working on she
said I'm translating Don Juan
of Lord Byron's in my head
now the poem is 17 000 words well
seventeen thousand lines law
and he said okay I'll give you a piece
of paper and a pen and I'll come back in
the morning and when he came back in the
morning she had translated into Russian
all of the Kanto in which Don Juan goes
to Moscow and he laughed at royalty the
Brilliance of this translation the humor
of law Bible that she had exactly done
inverse in Russian in the same rhyme
scheme that the very complicated rhyme
scheme that Byron uses in it's original
so he said if I keep giving you paper
you can you can think you can finish it
she said yes it took her two years and
she was in a Cell on her own and they
gave her the paper and at the end the
the guard allowed three copies to be
typed up and gave her one then sent her
to Gulag for the next eight years and
she completed her sentence and when she
came out of the gulag uh she heard her
pile of papers and she went to a
friend's house and there was an
apartment and five people were living in
the room and she joined them and she
stank of the gulag by all the cabs as
did her manuscript but she then typed it
up again with the revision she'd made in
the gulag it was subsequently published
and it is still to this day the standard
translation of Byron in the Russian
language some people man and some people
yeah and it was actually put on stage
with a massive hit within her lifetime
so she went from
she had a heart attack on the first
night which she fortunately survived but
I tell this story and I told it after
the one on Byron on June because it's
always been my belief and it's a to me
it's an Insight it's not original but
I've got it from various people which is
what you have up here the bastards can
never take
um they can uh how much of how much of
that so I have a friend in Canada Rex
Murphy who knows who's extremely erudite
and literate and charismatic and maybe
Canada's most remarkable journalist
um the sort of person that CBC actually
produced because he was a CBC production
so to speak
um
and what would have produced more of had
they actually done their job and
um instead of even setting themselves at
odds against him which they eventually
did
um he has knowledge of a vast Corpus of
poetry and
it's evident in the manner in which he
speaks because he has that lilt and
Cadence and Rhythm that's part and
parcel well and you're very very well
spoken is how much of that do you think
can can you tell how much of that is the
consequence of of having internalized uh
it's probably that and in my case the
great Good Fortune of being brought up
with the King James Bible and the Book
of common prayer right which if you have
them in your head and you recite them
every Sunday gives you a pretty good
idea of how to Cadence the English
language
right right so that's an extension of
the same thing in some real sense yeah
but I do I do think that I I think that
and I don't know and I as I say I got it
from various people when I was growing
up but I think the sense that you have
to furnish your mental furniture and you
have to furnish that well with the best
things
um because you might need it someday
yeah
it's more like a tool house than
Furnishing absolutely you bet you'll
need it any day but there might be a day
you really need it so far I've managed
not to be changed to any radiator for
years upon end but I like to think that
I could try to get by right but you also
do get by with these tools that you have
oh yeah this is one of the things that's
really struck me about how badly we
educate young men because
um it's harder to get young men
interested in literary issues than young
women but if you tell a young man well
you want to be successful or not well
they'll usually say well yeah I'd rather
be successful it's like well you know
you could hypothetically do that by
being a manipulative bully which doesn't
really work very well and is
counterproductive and will turn your
life and everyone around you the dirt
life into hell so I wouldn't recommend
that or you could
you could Master a few things one of
which might be language yes since you
think in it yes and since everything you
plan you'll plan using language and
everything you communicate about and and
bring people on board with will be
linguistically mediated absolutely but
the other thing is is that um
if you choose right and you read right
you you read well
um that also will guide you in your life
I mean in a few weeks time I'm doing a
favorite a poem of mine which is uh by
uh Constantine kavafi in the 20th
century Greek poet whose most famous
poem Ithaca which is really a
description or of course like our great
hero setting out to Isle of Ithaca but
kavafi just describes in this beautiful
poem
really what an ideal life would look
like
um and he says towards the end he says
then
Ithaca gave you the marvelous Journey
right
and right and okay so we could we could
sum up with that in some ways you know
we started this conversation talking
about purpose and we delved along the
way into the domains of courage and
truth and then into Beauty and language
and I would say those are all
manifestations you could think of those
all as manifestations of the word right
they're manifestations of the Divine
word that's a good way of thinking about
it too and it's very useful to know that
there isn't anything more powerful or
meaningful than that right and you said
that's been your experience in your life
right is that there there isn't a better
pathway than to think and speak in truth
you you have the most amazing possible
Adventures doing that and you meet the
highest possible caliber of people and
weird and unexpected things happen to
you all the time and they're often
magical and then there's also an element
of that and that's especially true on
the poetic front that's allied with
beauty and that's a good deal because
why not add to truth and courage Beauty
and one of the things that's the number
of the great poets notice Keith's
perhaps most famously
um but uh rilka in the the his um a
famous poem on the Torso an antique
torso
um he says that the poet that that the
he says in the poem that the bust the
end the beautiful antique bus the the
torsa is telling him something right if
you remember rilka is trying to work out
what it is and same thing exactly and
the and what the and this is my belief
is this is a beautiful thing is not just
beautiful it's telling you something and
what the what the antique torso says to
rilka is you must change your life right
right right that's rilka yeah that's
real okay okay
yeah well that's well that's why people
are terrified of beauty too yeah because
you know and you might say
you're terrified of Beauty in proportion
to the distance your life is from what's
beautiful absolutely because it's a
judge right it's an ultimate judge it's
like and for it to say nothing about you
is this it's it's a terrible judgment
that's why you used to say the great the
great thing of modern uh the modern
selfie culture was
um isn't this work of art lucky enough
to be in this photo with me yeah
of course yeah that's exactly the wrong
way around aren't I lucky to be standing
in front of this beautiful thing right
well that's that's the proper attitude
of of gratitude as well yeah all right
Mr Murray thank you everyone for
watching and listening um and walking
with us through these complicated and
hopefully promising domains uh it's
always a pleasure to talk to you we seem
to get a little farther with each
conversation and that's always useful
I'm going to switch over to the Daily
wire plus side
um and talk to Douglas a little bit more
about uh graphical issues and about the
manner in which his calling you might
say made itself manifest I'm very
curious about that and so um if you're
inclined to join us there do so
otherwise thank you very much for your
time and attention and to the dataware
Plus for making this possible and for
you sitting down and talking to me today
um it's always much appreciated the film
crew here in New York
um told the policemen and firemen who
have their Sirens going pretty much
through the entire podcast which is one
of the things that makes New York so
exciting uh and apart from that until
next time
good to see you all thanks Douglas thank
you
[Music]